Kubernetes for Beginners
Chapter 2 of 21 · Section 4 of 7
Controllers: The Pattern That Makes Everything Work
We've been talking about controllers the entire course. We saw them in the control plane, they appeared in the request flow, and we mentioned them in the previous sub-part when describing the loop. Time to formalize them: what they are, how they're built, and why the whole model depends on them.
What a controller is
A controller is a process (or a piece inside a larger process) that implements the control pattern: it continuously watches the state of certain objects and acts when observed state differs from desired state.
Not an exotic abstraction. The official docs literally define them as "control loops that watch the state of your cluster, then make or request changes where needed". Thermostat and boiler: the controller observes, compares, and acts.
The pattern, with code
Any controller — the ReplicaSet controller, a custom operator of yours, a third-party one — fits this shape:
for {
event := waitForChangeInApiServer()
object := fetchDesiredState(event)
real := observeRealWorld(object)
if real != desired(object) {
executeActionFor(object)
}
reportStatus(object)
}
Illustrative pseudocode. For the real pattern in client-go (informers + workqueues), read the Kubernetes project's sample-controller.
The "action" depends on the controller type:
ReplicaSet controller: if there are fewer Pods than declared, create more. If more, delete some.
Deployment controller: manages a ReplicaSet and its previous revisions to implement rolling updates.
Node controller: marks nodes as NotReady if they stop reporting, and eventually evicts their Pods.
Service controller: on cloud clusters, requests a LoadBalancer from the provider when someone creates a Service of type LoadBalancer.
Each is independent, each watches its own resources, and they all coexist without knowing about each other.
Informers: how a controller "watches"
In real implementations (both in kube-controller-manager's controllers and in operators built with client-go or frameworks like Kubebuilder), the watching is done by a piece called an informer.
An informer:
Does an initial LIST against the apiserver to load current state of all objects of the type it cares about.
Opens a persistent WATCH to receive every change (ADDED, MODIFIED, DELETED) from that point on.
Maintains a local cache with all those objects.
When a change arrives, it pushes the object's name onto a workqueue.
One or several workers pull items from the queue and run the reconcile.
The local cache matters: when the reconcile needs to query state, it reads from the cache — not from the apiserver. That drastically reduces apiserver load and makes it possible to run hundreds of controllers simultaneously.
Deep dive
Informers, workqueues, DeltaFIFO, and the rest of the client-go machinery deserve their own post. They're on the backlog as "Informers and workqueues in client-go".
Single source of truth: the apiserver
A fundamental property of the model: controllers never read or write etcd directly. Everything goes through the apiserver.
This has several consequences worth understanding:
Centralized audit: if you want to know who changed what, apiserver audit logs have it all.
Admission uniformly applied: validations and mutating webhooks run for anyone — humans, controllers, tools — writing through the API.
etcd isolation: if you swap etcd for another database tomorrow, controllers don't notice.
Resilience: if the apiserver goes down, controllers pause — they don't corrupt anything. When it comes back, they reconcile and everything proceeds.
Controllers and extensibility
Built-in controllers cover the standard types (Deployments, Jobs, Services, …). But the model is open: you can write your own controller to reconcile your own types (CRDs, covered in the next sub-part) or even to augment behavior on existing types.
That pattern — a CRD describing a thing + a controller that reconciles it — is what's known as the Operator pattern. It's not "a feature" of Kubernetes; it's the natural application of the control pattern to a specific domain. There are operators for almost anything: PostgreSQL, Kafka, Prometheus, cert-manager, Argo CD.
What to remember for the KCNA
A controller is a loop that observes desired vs real state and acts to converge them.
Controllers talk to the apiserver, never to etcd directly.
Controllers are independent: each watches its own resources, and the system emerges from their collaboration.
The Operator pattern = CRD + custom controller. The natural extension of the model.
With this you understand 100% of how the declarative model works. In the next sub-part we open the piece that keeps the API from being closed: CRDs.