Kubernetes for Beginners
Chapter 5 of 21 · Section 1 of 7
Introduction: Separating Config from Code
We closed chapter 4 with a promise: separate configuration from code. Hard-coding URLs, flags, and passwords in the container image turns every minor change — a moving endpoint, a rotated key — into a rebuild + push + new rollout. At scale, that's not sustainable.
Kubernetes solves the problem with two close cousins: ConfigMap and Secret. Same data model (keys and values), same ways to inject them into a Pod (env vars or files), one important operational difference.
The principle: app + environment
The idea, as old as Unix, is that a container image should be portable across environments: the same image runs in dev, staging, prod. The only thing that changes is the injected configuration.
The 12-Factor App (which we'll cover formally in chapter 16) calls this Factor 3: Store config in the environment. Kubernetes makes it concrete with ConfigMap and Secret.
ConfigMap vs Secret in one sentence
ConfigMap: non-sensitive configuration. URLs, feature flags, cache sizes, log levels.
Secret: sensitive configuration. API keys, passwords, certificates, DB tokens.
The difference isn't in the data model (both store keys and values) but in operational handling: Secrets are logged less, encrypted at rest if you turn on encryption at rest, and typically restricted more tightly via RBAC. But in their basic form — a freshly applied Secret without encryption at rest enabled — the content sits in etcd encoded as base64. Not encrypted.
It's one of the spots where the KCNA exam hits hardest and where most people get tripped up. We'll cover it in depth in the Secrets sub-part.
Why a separate object, not env vars in the Pod
You could put env vars directly in the Pod spec:
containers:
- name: app
image: myapp:1.0
env:
- name: DATABASE_URL
value: postgres://prod-db:5432/myapp
- name: API_KEY
value: "sk-prod-secret"
It works, but breaks several things:
The Deployment YAML now contains the secrets — it's in git, everyone sees it.
To change the DB endpoint, you modify the Deployment and trigger a full rollout.
You can't share the same config across different Pods without duplicating it.
ConfigMap and Secret fix all three: the Pod references a name, not the value. The source of truth lives in another object, managed separately, possibly with different permissions.
What we'll cover
ConfigMap: how to create one (literal, file, directory) and how to consume it.
Secret: built-in types, base64 vs real encryption, encryption at rest.
Volume vs env: when each injection method is the right call.
Updates: what happens when they change. Spoiler: not what you'd expect.
Limits and alternatives: external-secrets, sealed-secrets, encryption providers.
By the end, you'll know which type to use, how to inject it correctly, and understand why Kubernetes Secrets alone aren't a serious secret-management solution — and which tools complement them.