Kubernetes for Beginners
Chapter 5 of 21 · Section 5 of 7
Updates: What Happens When They Change
In the previous sub-part we saw what happens technically when a ConfigMap or Secret changes: env vars don't update, volumes do but the app has to know how to reload. Now to the operational side: how these objects get rotated in real life without a minor change taking down a service.
The production problem
Three typical "ConfigMap changed but Pods didn't" flows:
Someone pushes a ConfigMap change via GitOps. Argo CD applies it. Pods keep the old config because they didn't restart. Nobody notices until debugging shows weird values.
You rotate a Secret (e.g. DB credentials). Pods keep authenticating with the old one. The rotation is only halfway until you restart.
You change config.yaml mounted as a volume. The file updates, but the app doesn't reread — keeps the in-memory copy.
There's no single fix — it depends on what kind of change and what kind of app.
Strategy 1: explicit rollout restart
kubectl rollout restart deployment/web
The most direct command. Adds a timestamped annotation to the template, which counts as "template changed" for the Deployment and triggers a rolling update. New Pods pick up the new config at startup.
This is what you'll do most of the time. Works for env vars, volumes, and Secrets. Only consideration: it respects maxSurge and maxUnavailable, so the rotation is gradual.
Strategy 2: config hash in the template
The automated version. Each apply generates a hash of the ConfigMap/Secret and stores it as a template annotation:
spec:
template:
metadata:
annotations:
config-checksum: "sha256:<hash>"
Helm does it with {{ include "myapp.config" . | sha256sum }}. Kustomize does it on its own with configMapGenerator (generates a hash suffix in the name and references the new name in Pods). Argo CD respects either.
Benefit: no extra step, no human intervention. Each ConfigMap change naturally forces a rollout.
Strategy 3: Reloader
Reloader is a controller that watches ConfigMaps and Secrets and triggers rollout restart automatically when they change, based on an annotation:
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
annotations:
reloader.stakater.com/auto: "true"
spec:
...
Useful when you're not using a templating system that handles the hash automatically. One annotation and you forget about the problem.
Strategy 4: Immutable + hash suffix
The cleanest pattern for big GitOps environments. Mark your ConfigMaps as immutable: true and name each version with a hash suffix:
name: app-config-7c9f8c4d
name: app-config-9b8a7e6f # new version, new object
Each change creates a new object. The Deployment points to the new name, which is obviously a template change, so the rollout fires. The old ConfigMap stays until you clean it up (or kustomize/Argo CD does it for you).
Advantage over annotation hash: rollback becomes trivial. Point at the old ConfigMap and the Pods remount the old file.
Reload without restart (apps that can)
For apps that can reload config without restarting (nginx, prometheus, envoy, fluent-bit):
Mount the ConfigMap as a volume.
When kubelet propagates the change (typically < 60s), the file updates.
Something triggers the reload. Options: a sidecar that watches the file and sends SIGHUP to the main process, or an HTTP endpoint on the app (POST /-/reload).
This pattern is common in observability stacks where you want to change Prometheus rules, dashboards, or log pipelines without bouncing the service.
Real Secret rotation
Native Kubernetes Secrets don't rotate themselves. If your identity provider (AWS IAM, GCP IAM, Vault) issues credentials with expiration, there are three paths:
External Secrets Operator: watches an external secret manager (Vault, AWS Secrets Manager, etc.) and materializes Kubernetes Secrets with the content, refreshing periodically. Covered in the next sub-part.
cert-manager: rotates certificates automatically and updates the kubernetes.io/tls Secret before they expire.
Secrets CSI driver: mounts secrets directly from an external secret manager, bypassing etcd. More complex but most secure.
For the KCNA
kubectl rollout restart deployment/X is the explicit restart that picks up the new config.
Config hash in an annotation or hash suffix on the name + immutable: true are the common GitOps patterns.
Reloader is the add-on that automates the restart when a ConfigMap/Secret changes.
Apps that can reload (nginx, prometheus) can take new config without a restart if you mount it as a volume.
For serious credential rotation, native Secrets aren't enough — you need external tooling.
We close in the next sub-part with the model's limits and the most-used tools: external-secrets, sealed-secrets, Vault, and why anyone with a half-serious cluster doesn't stop at native Secrets.